Hey everyone and welcome to
an exciting new course on Node js.
In this particular course we
are going to learn Node js
that what is Node js and how you
can build web servers and a lot
of cool stuff with Node js.
As a quick introduction, my
name is Piyush Kirk and I
am going to be your instructor
throughout this course.
I'm a full stack developer
and a YouTuber and I have built
and created a lot of content
on my YouTube channel as well.
So this particular course on Node js
is actually very close to my heart.
So I have been working with Node js
for over, I guess 8 years, around 8
years and I have built a lot of cool
stuff around it and we are going to
discuss that how you can use Node
js.
And this is going to be an absolute
beginner to intermediate course.
The only prerequisite for
this particular course is
if you know JavaScript.
Okay?
So you should know basics
of JavaScript because ultimately
we are going to code a lot
of things in JavaScript, so only
that is the prerequisite.
Rest everything,
each and everything will be taught
in this particular class.
So in this particular course we are
going to cover like from the
absolute basics like what is Node
js, how Node js was built and how
Node js internally works all the
way to integrating Postgres in our,
Node js application and building
RESTful APIs along with
authentication, JWT sessions,
cookies and a lot of more stuff.
So I welcome you again
to this premium Node js course.
And with that let's start our very
first lecture on what is Node js?
So what is Node js?
Right?
So whenever we talk about or whenever
I ask my learners that, hey,
can you tell me what is Node js?
I get few answers like, hey,
it's a framework, or some
people say it's a library.
So I'm sure that you are
also confused that if it is
a framework or a library.
So let's understand that
what exactly is Node js?
Now before understanding what is Node
js, let's understand this js part.
js stands for JavaScript.
Do you even know that
what is JavaScript?
Let's try to understand
this JavaScript thing.
So let's say that you can see that
right now I have a browser here.
And on this particular browser I
have opened my personal portfolio
website that is on puresha.dev
now this browser can only
understand three languages, right?
This browser can only understand
HTML, CSS and JavaScript.
HTML that provides the basic
layout, basic structure to this
particular website, CSS is for
the styling part and JavaScript is
for the functionality part.
Now tell me one thing,
is there any other language that
a browser can understand?
Not really.
At least not at the time
of recording this video.
So these are the only three languages
which builds whole Internet,
which builds whole websites.
Okay, now here, one interesting
part is that there is
something known as JavaScript
engine inside the browser.
Let me show you one thing.
For example, if I open my
browser right here, so you can
see that I have a whiteboard
open and it's a browser.
And let's say I just open any website
that is like google.com, right?
I hope you know what is google.com
a huge shout out
to google.com amazing search engine.
So if I go into the console, right,
you can see I'm opening my console.
In this particular console I can
write any valid JavaScript code.
For example, if I say two
plus two, I'm getting four.
If I say console log and I say
hello, what you will notice is that
yes, I am able to run this code
without any error, without any
issue and I'm getting the hello as
console log.
How am I able to run this GS
code inside the console?
Because when you download
this browser, right now I'm
using a Chrome browser.
When you download this browser,
a js engine is
automatically shipped along.
So every browser, whichever you
download has something known as
JavaScript engine inside them.
With this JavaScript engine,
your browser is able to compile
and execute JavaScript code.
If your browser does not have this
JavaScript engine, there is no way
to run a JavaScript code.
So repeating my question again,
how am I able to run this code here?
Because I'm using a Chrome
and chrome has a JavaScript engine.
If this JavaScript engine was not
there, this, there is no chance
that this code is going to execute
right now with that, now we have a
knowledge that, okay, there are
three languages of a browser and
JavaScript engine is the one that
is responsible for running the
JavaScript.
Now JavaScript, due to this
JavaScript engine which is
directly embedded into a browser,
there is one limitation.
The limitation is that can you run
JavaScript outside the browser?
I'm asking you that, can you guys run
The answer is no.
Reason for that is because
JavaScript engine is embedded
into the browsers, it
is inside the browser.
So because on my system
I cannot have this GS engine thing.
There is no that I can run
JavaScript outside the browser.
And that's even fine.
That's fine because when JavaScript
was written, when JavaScript
was developed, it was developed
for the browsers, right?
The whole purpose of JavaScript
was to provide
the interactivity to browsers.
And that is where GS Engine
was born and browsers were
given the js engine, right?
So it's a limitation, but that's
a required thing, right?
Now every browser, like There
are various JavaScript engines.
For example, there is this
V8 engine which Chrome use.
There is this Spider Monkey which is
by Firefox, and there
is this Apple WebKit engine
which is used by Safari.
So all the browsers have
their own JavaScript engine.
And V8 by Chrome, Spider Monkey
by Firefox, and this Apple WebKit.
And there is no need
to remember them.
Now interesting part starts here.
Out of these JavaScript engines
out there, this V8 engine which
Chrome uses is an open source one.
What do I mean by open source?
Open source basically means
the code is publicly available.
The code of this v8 engine is
publicly available on the GitHub
now, because this v8 engine which is
inside the Chrome, this, this Chrome
has V8 engine which is open source.
You know this scientist, this
Rian D, his name is Rihan.
What he did, he did
something very crazy.
You know what he did?
He took this open source
engine, okay, open source V8 engine,
and embedded this V8
engine into a C program.
Now what I did took a V8 engine, take
a C program, take this V8 engine
and embed inside a C program.
Now you tell me, can you run C
outside the browser?
Of course.
C is a machine language, right?
It has the capability to talk
to the machine, to talk
to your hardware, to talk
to your operating system.
Now, when you embed this V8 engine
and into a C program, V8 engine is
capable of executing JavaScript.
C can run outside the browser.
With this particular thing,
you were able to execute
JavaScript outside the browser.
And this project, this V8,
engine embedded into the C,
this project was named as Node js.
Okay?
So if someone asks
you, what is node js?
Node js is basically a project made
by this crazy scientist ran that is
basically the open source V8 engine
of Chrome embedded into a C program.
So, if I go back to my previous
question that I asked
you that, what is node js?
Is it a framework?
No.
Is it a library?
What is Node js then?
Right?
So Node js is nothing but just
a runtime environment.
So Node js, it's a C program with
V8 engine which provides you
an environment in which you can run
JavaScript outside the browser.
If you are from Java background,
let's say, do you know that there is
something known as jvm, right?
There is JVM and there is
something known as jre.
What is gre?
Just in case you know Java, that
is Java runtime environment.
If you want to run any Java code
on your, on your system,
you should have that GRE
installed similar to that.
If you want to run JavaScript,
you should have this V8,
any JavaScript engine installed.
In browsers you have these
engines by default, Shift.
But on your machine, if you Want
to run JavaScript outside of the
machine, you can download this
node js, which is a runtime
environment, basically a C
program, along with the Chrome's
V8 engine.
So crazy stuff, right?
So this is basically Node js.
Now what are what were the advantages
of this particular approach?
With this approach, number
one, you can run JavaScript
outside the browser.
You can build web servers
with JavaScript, you can build
CLI tools with JavaScript.
You can build iOS and Android
applications with JavaScript.
And you can even build like,
applications for IoT.
You can build applications for,
let's say Apple Var or any
other smartwatch on this earth.
So the possibilities
are actually endless.
So huge.
Shout out to Rayan,
who developed Node js.
Thank you so much.
And let me show you.
So if I open up my terminal,
okay, so let's say if I, open
up my terminal, so you can see that
this is my terminal window.
So this is a terminal window which is
of course outside the browser.
Now see what I can do is
I already have Node js
installed on my machine.
And don't worry, in the next
video I'll show you how
you can also install Node js
if I type node and enter.
Can you see that?
Actually I am into the Node
js, which is version 22.
And now if I say console log.
Hey there, do you think that
this code is going to execute?
Let's try.
If I do enter, this code
was executing fine.
If I say two plus five, you
can see I'm getting seven.
So can you see that I am able to exit
execute this code which was, which
is in JavaScript, which browsers
can run outside of the browser?
Why?
Because I have Node js installed.
Can this be possible if I didn't
have the Node js installed?
No, because I need the js engine.
So for this particular js engine
thing, I have installed Node
js, which provides this
JavaScript v8 engine in my
machine, in my local machine
and I can run JavaScript
outside the browser.
So I hope that with this
particular video you got a clarity
on what Node js is.
Okay, because we are going
to code a lot of things in Node js.
So you have to keep in mind that Node
js is not a framework or a library,
it is actually a JavaScript runtime.
Okay, so if I just go on
to the Node js official website.
Okay, so let's visit the official
website of Node js.
So what you will notice is it
says run JavaScript everywhere.
So Node js is a free again,
it's a free and open source.
Node js project is also,
is also open source cross platform
JavaScript runtime environment
that lets developers create
servers, web applications, command
line tools and scripts.
Okay, so this is basically your
what do you call Node js?
And you can see that we have a lot
of examples also which we will
eventually see as we move forward.
But in this video, the main
motive was to teach you
that what is Node js?
So with that, let's end the video
and I'll meet you in the next one.
Until then, bye bye and take care of.